[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology well welcome to another episode
of church history and theology today we
get to delve into the topic of the New
Testament Canon and the church this is
perhaps one of those episodes that
stands out out in my mind uh I know the
first time we walked through uh all of
this we dealt with the the scriptures in
the church we try to take a much more um
higher level view of it uh from maybe
about 50,000 ft up but here we're going
to be going down into the weeds sum this
will be one of several installments
regarding the uh nature of the
scriptures and the church's recognition
of them um not all in a row by the way
we are going to be sprinkling these
throughout uh over the next uh several
well goodness the next several dozen
episodes I suppose we'll probably have
about three or four that are focused
really on the Canon issues and on
different people recognizing them trying
to come up with lists others that are uh
discussing issues and difficulties
regarding certain books of the New
Testament and uh it's quite a trip and
something that's not worth uh so little
that we can skim over the top of it so
what we're going to do uh this time is
to look at the new test Canon and the
church and that whole concept of how is
it we should think about scripture how
is it we should think about the idea of
a Canon of scripture uh this this this
concept of why why are we even talking
about more scripture over the Old
Testament um if we had the apostles and
if we literally have the successors of
the Apostles why we need Scripture at
all um well all of that will kind of
come to pass as we uh look into these so
um
why talk about this at all well I am of
the opinion that scripture is one of the
grandest uh gifts that God ever gave to
his people the idea that God has spoken
that he has not only spoken but has
inspired the writings of his scriptures
but even more than that that he has
preserved uh and that he has
specifically LED his people in such a
way that they recognized his words for
the inherent Authority that they had uh
is perhaps one of the greatest things
and stories ever in church history it is
one of the reasons why it sits so high
in my mind for us to take serious when
we when we address the issues of Canon
this is not a simple discussion um but
it is certainly one worth delving into
and I usually find people will talk
about it either from their own Church's
tradition uh or they'll talk about it
kind of tangentially or quickly um but I
don't think that something as important
as the scriptures should be given a a
quick uh Focus so we're going to spend a
lot of time on that so tonight is just
going to be introducing the concepts uh
there's several parts of this that we're
going to see uh flourish out throughout
the next couple of centuries uh that we
walk through uh but tonight here we
introduce the
idea you might look at that and go ah
the Canon of the New Testament I mean
there's no real debate over it anymore
so why sit here and talk about this
right I mean every every uh denomination
of the church be it Catholic be it
Orthodox be it uh Protestant um really
has no problem with the 27 books of the
New Testament that is correct uh the
vast majority of the New Testament has
been agreed upon for the vast majority
of time uh that the church has and this
is one of the benefits of long time and
we get to have that perspective we get
to walk down to the store if we want a a
copy of the New Testament we can
purchase it um I just bought for
instance a several cases of um of pocket
Bibles for our church and I can buy them
by the case and it's not that
expensive that kind of access to the
word of God has I believe taught us a
lower value of what we hold because the
scriptures have not always been
available like that in fact even upon
their first writing when when Paul sits
down and writes the book to the
Ephesians for instance he has a copy of
it that he holds on to and he sends off
another copy as was the common practice
in that day
and nobody else is aware that that's
being written it took time for people to
be able to see it even a circular letter
like the book of Ephesians these these
types of things as they go out into the
world are not instantaneous they take
time um here though we live in a time
where we can literally go to any number
of thousands of websites that have
entire copies of multiple versions of
the Bible and see it all for
free that's an Incredible Gift and it is
also a warning to us not to treat it as
everyday in common just because it is
plentiful right even this day if you
want a Bible you can go to any store you
can pick it up you can be reading it
within 5 minutes modern accessibility
can
often m ask the privilege that we have
in holding a completed
Bible uh to understand the Bible's uh
recognition and preservation through
history though we have to look into how
early Christians approached and
discerned what was truly
scripture um and so this this episode
instead of just being a chronological
Journey we're really going to be focused
a lot in the first and uh and second
century um and we're going to be delving
into one of the foundational theological
issues that the early church faced that
is the recognition and the authority of
scripture even though they did not have
a cleancut Bible such as we
do they spent no problem uh and and
concern over the amount of time that
they would spend ensuring that what they
had went back to the apostles that was
the goal that was the goal Christ had
sent his Apostles into the world and the
apostles had written many
letters and God was preserving his word
and in that time of recognition in that
era of recognition there was not a
singular bound volume of the New
Testament floating around didn't work
like that it's not like it lowered down
from heaven with a new table of contents
you know Jesus ascends to heaven and
down comes the Bible with all of its uh
table of contents here you are Matthew
Mark Luke John acts letters to the
Romans you know the whole song right it
wasn't like that but there was an
anticipation that there ought to be more
scripture after the Old
Testament see this is the thing
scripture in its very
nature is a ratification of divine
promises in its very nature it is
divine it is God as its author not even
just the apostles right we read this in
the New Testament right the holy men of
God were carried along as they wrote
from the Holy Spirit
right the Holy Spirit himself inspired
these words and one of the main purposes
of these as we call them Old Testament
and New Testament or old Covenant and
New Covenant um these are the
ratification documents of the assurances
of God's promises to his people right
don't change the words why because these
are God's promises don't add to them
don't take from them the essence of
scripture really lies in its Divine
promise a ratification from God to his
people that grounds our faith he tells
us about this in so many different ways
the Old Testament is Rife with these
promises do this and you will live do it
not and I will ensure you
die right believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ and you will
live this shouldn't teach us that
scripture is all the same
though just because the Old Testament is
inspired and the New Testament is
inspired doesn't mean that God used the
same
mechanisms the book of Hebrews makes it
really clear that God spoke in all sorts
of different ways in the Old Testament
but in the New Testament with the coming
of the son he has spoken us through his
son and that has changed how inspiration
works oh I don't mean that the Old
Testament is less inspired farbe it both
are inspired and both are completely and
thoroughly authoritative for the church
the Old Testament and the new but the
mechanisms of inspiration are are
different in the New Testament after the
coming of the Holy Spirit think with me
on this right the book of the law on
Mount Si was literally written with the
Finger of God on stone tablets that is a
completely different mechanism than
anything we see elsewise Moses has the
uh the literal job of receiving the word
of God he's for as far as for the law
was concerned he wasn't physically
writing that God was physically writing
that it's an incredible thing right the
historical books many times are written
by nameless authors but the histories
that they contain are legitimately
inspired books of poetry often times
written as simple personal Reflections
sometimes even truth isms right you read
uh some of the wisdom literature you
have things that are generally true in
the world and yet still inspired to be
in
scripture right the prophets uh have a
different way of doing things right
self- attested direct account
thus says the Lord right and in many
cases the Lord dictates his prophetic
message word for
word but the apostolic age introduced a
new mode of
inspiration doing this through the
indwelling of the holy spirit is focused
on eyewitness accounts right when Moses
was writing for instance the uh the Book
of Genesis that was not an eyewitness
account those things took place
400 4,000 5,000 6,000 years
before
Moses the New Testament writings serve
as distinct covenantal functions the
gospels as covenantal announcements the
book of Acts as that covenant's
dissemination and the Book of Revelation
as a covenantal
conclusion this is the announcement of
the Kingdom of Heaven the Kingdom of
Heaven going forth into the world and
the kingdom of heaven coming to its
culminating
end and the Epistles all serve as
instructions while we are as the book of
Hebrews says receiving that
Kingdom in all of
that everything is
different the apostles and the prophets
provide different foundations for the
church than the Torah provided
foundations for the people of Israel
they're different both are necessary
right the Old Testament and the New
Testament both are very very necessary
yet they're
distinct the role of the Apostles we're
dealing in
authoritative uh nonword forword
dictates that were distinct from the Old
Testament
prophetic right you do not have the
apostles saying um you know uh Paul to
the uh uh to the to the church in
colasse uh thus says the Lord Lord uh
the God of all these things uh repent
for the time is near you're not going to
have prophetic message like that you
have distinct expressions of apostolic
leadership some of which are
preserved and some of those are
not Paul wrote not just these books
Peter wrote not just these books they
wrote many other things during their
lives but those things weren't scripture
just because Apostle said it or wrote it
doesn't make it
scripture that has to be really clear
here some of the things the apostles
wrote weren't
scripture how do we know that we'll get
into that but in short because they
weren't
preserved let's look a little further
the apostolic and New Testament Prophet
Canon
recognition when we get into
understanding the concept of Canon I
think a lot of
people imagine that the church just had
this list somehow of what things make up
a Canon document that kind of stuff is
done in retroflex that is not done in
it's not like you have uh you know the
the second century Church sitting around
going you know what we need we need a
new testament okay so what kind of
things should we have well it should be
conected to a written by an apostle all
right um it should it should feel like
this maybe it should be about this long
or uh it should have this quality or it
you know quotes from Isaiah or no one's
sitting around doing that and building a
cannon right that's not how this works
the the apostles as they had their own
leadership in the church as they came
towards the end of their lives they
began writing
down the New Testament the vast majority
of the New Testament is written within
the last 10 years of each Apostle's
life that should clue us into
something not only are the apostles
writing these things but they are
insisting their categories as scripture
the moment that the Inc is
dry that also needs to
be well understood
it is not only the apostles that are
able to recognize for the early church
what is and is not scripture but also
there is indication that the New
Testament prophets in 1 Corinthians 14
are also tasked with the job of
identifying inspired
writings you see that if you're curious
in 1 Corinthians 14: 37 and
38 New Testament prophets were
given part of the responsibility to
identify authoritative inspired writings
and why shouldn't it be so the Same
Spirit of the prophets is inspiring the
pen of the Apostles makes perfect
sense it is one of the reasons why there
is no debate over the vast majority of
the New Testament
ever right over Paul's letters hardly
anything debate wise over the four
gospels hardly anything ever book of
Acts hm
everyone understands these things to be
largely clear from the earliest days
onwards now I don't express to
understand how difficult it was to know
how first and second Corinthians were
inspired in the other one or two letters
that Paul wrote to the church in Corinth
were
not now were those authoritative for the
church in Corinth oh you bet that was an
instruction from an apostle but were
they broadly
uh inspired were they inspired by God
and were they authoritative for the
whole church
no no they
weren't there's a different Authority
and kind in scripture and it's why from
our perspective so late in the church
age we are able to look back and see
these things pretty
clear Paul wrote another letter to the
church in
ladia we we've never seen it we don't
know what it looks like we don't know
anything about
it but we know Paul wrote it and we know
it wasn't preserved so here's a quick
thing from our perspective was it
scripture absolutely
not God preserves his
word if it wasn't preserved that
immediately removes it from any concept
of it being
scripture there was a recognition in the
first century
regarding not only the writings of Paul
largely speaking as scripture uh Peter
does this uh in second Peter 3:16 but
another one that people aren't aware of
is that Paul identifies the Gospel of
Luke as scripture when he writes his
letter to
Timothy and what's really interesting is
he does that within 18 months to 2 years
of when the Gospel of Luke was
written say well how did he you know
that how you know how how was he aware
of that he was traveling with Luke at
the
time which meant Luke was aware that
what he was writing was inspired
scripture those types of things stand
out to us and Luke by the way is just
volume one of a two volume work called
Luke
acts Paul is able to identify Luke as
scripture Peter identifies the the
writings of Paul as scripture Paul calls
First Corinthians scripture to those he
calls it inspired while he's writing the
book of First Corinthians so they
knew what they were writing was inspired
now whether that's true for all
situations I don't know but what we do
know is that the apostles were able to
identify these things in the first
century and did and we have indication
of nearly half the entire New Testament
right there in the biblical text it's
pretty
straightforward this is one of those
cool aspects about this is that God did
not leave us to just guess on things he
did give us a wonderful boost in the
very first century of the church
regarding the apostolic and the New
Testament Prophet recognitions of the
Canon as far as for what exact role the
New Testament prophets play we don't
really know their full
story that's part of
that shroud of church history that we
just don't understand but I will say
this after the fact with the passing of
the offices of prophet and
Apostle the post-apostolic recognition
of the
Canon takes on a very different
tone yet it's quite
familiar we have discussed when we
discussed the leadership of the early
church that God always works with a
multifocality this is the only way to
deal with fallible
people you have multiple Elders in the
church mult mulle Apostles to send it
out you have multiple Witnesses multiple
multiple always multifocality of
recognition means that throughout the
church throughout all of the Believers
you have different bodies of Christians
that are
recognizing the New Testament documents
for the inherent Authority that they had
now here's the real fun thing not all of
them agree with one another in fact they
all have minor differences we should
expect that they are fallible people but
together they preserve and
recognize the New
Testament by the early 2nd
Century the writings of the Apostolic
Church show a deep familiarity with
nearly all the New Testament
books nearly all of them not not with
regards to you know oh the diday quotes
this and that the the diday quotes the
book Gospel of Matthew and that's about
it but as we even saw last time we were
together the book of Clement first
Clement quotes nearly half the New
Testament uh of books of half the New
Testament 11 or 13 depending on how you
uh how you feel about things like
Illusions right the Epistle of Barnabas
quotes several of them as well very
early on Ignatius If We Hold to the
middle recension we'll talk about
Ignatius here sometime soon uh there's a
lot of problems with his text but let's
just stick with the the
current uh consensus quote unquote view
and say the middle recension I mean
Ignatius quotes 10 of the New Testament
books polycarp several more Justin
Martyr in fact if you construct all of
the writers from
150 all the way back down to the
apostles basically if you go from the
end of the Apostles all the way up to
the year 150 you have quotes
that we have just randomly preserved in
ancient documents that are not scripture
from every single book of the New
Testament with the exception of 2
Thessalonians phiman and then listen to
these last three second and third John
and
[Music]
Jude all told you're talking less than
10 chapters that are not represented in
the knowledge
across the Church of just things that we
have evidence for before the year 150
this is an incredible thing simply
because as we are looking at this we're
seeing that the the references to these
things are across the board already well
attested to actually before the end of
the first century before we even get to
the year 100 90% of the New Testament is
recognized now also recognize this the
Old Testament is already finished
they have the Old Testament which is
even to our modern day Bibles 77 79% of
all scripture is the Old Testament the
New
Testament by the end of the first
century literally one generation after
the apostles we are already at 90% of
the new testament which means we've
got a handful of one chapter
books and a couple of short
other uh references and it really gets
difficult for us to imagine that there
is anything confusing to the Apostolic
Church having the life of the Apostles
the testimony of the New Testament
prophets the identification just in
common reference to multiples of these
things everything Matthew Mark Luke John
acts Romans uh First
Corinthians uh Ephesians
Colossians 1 and 2 Timothy
Titus Hebrews James 1 and second Peter
first John
and the
rest we have some difficulty with in the
very first century but once you open up
to the very start of the second century
we've already got Testaments throughout
the areas Beyond and this is not all
that was being written this is just what
we randomly have we don't go to the
post-apostolic church and say ah they
quoted therefore it's scripture no no no
no no no no scripture is scripture when
God inspires it we got to get our
theology right on that scripture is
scripture regardless if nobody knows
about it right when Paul sat down and
wrote as we open this up when Paul sat
down and wrote the book of
Ephesians and he and he let's put it in
common terms he mails it off right he
sends it out with his uh Courier right
is it
scripture the answer is yes it's
scripture how many people know about it
one two
by the time he gets to the church in
Ephesus is it scripture yes still
scripture all right the church in
Ephesus knows about it okay scripture
and they to pass it around and have
other people read it okay great great so
they pass it around three four five
churches know about it read it recognize
it as scripture know it's
authoritativeness right or it's
Authority is it scripture because the
recognizing it or was it already
scripture it's already scripture
I it's not even up for a debate on the
nature of it it is scripture because God
inspired it it is not scripture because
they recognized it the church does not
have the authority to canonize something
to make it scripture the church broadly
just
recognizes what God is already inspired
this is why multifocality is absolutely
important because this is how God
preserves his word by the way it's also
how he encouraged the church to
recognize this word watch these two
things if you're familiar with the area
of study known as textual criticism or
the study of textual variance among
manuscripts and history you will start
to see and I hope you appreciate the
existence of textual variant because
it's really good news for us we are
actually able to reconstruct the
originals due to the existence of
textual
variants the absence of textual variance
immediately calls one to
concern because then someone somewhere
had abilities to make
changes and we would never know about
it but the very existence of things like
textual variance or or disagreements
between manuscripts sometimes it's a
word sometimes it's a piece of a word
sometimes not even translatable in fact
most of the time it's not even
translatable but sometimes it's like a
half a verse or a whole verse and that
causes people to be concerned we
shouldn't be concerned it's actually
actually how it helps us to reconstruct
the manuscript tree be able to work our
way back and it actually gives us a way
to work our way back to the original
with a an extremely high degree of
accuracy in fact there's nothing that
even comes close to it in all of the
ancient world with regards to the
accuracy that we can rebuild it right
the same goes for
recognition the way that God preserved
textual variance to ensure that that his
infallible text would be preserved
through fallible people is the exact
same mechanism by which he had the
cannon be recognized fallible people
Christians throughout the
world recognizing an infallible text
this is how God works with us it is how
he has fallible people such as myself
and and other Elders in our church that
through our fallibility and mutual
upholding God allows us to lead a church
to his infallible promises will we do it
perfectly no not at
all not at all but the church broadly
speaking recognizes the inherent
Authority that is built into the
scriptures due to the very fact that not
all of them
agree I want to I want to clarify that
because it usually gets talked about the
nature of Canon as if it is a productive
process rather than a pruning process as
if they're sitting around going you know
what you know what we really need we
really need a new testament let's let's
go around and try to find uh what things
fit our list and we will include all of
those and we will do that that's not how
this works that may be how it works on a
local level here and there but how it
worked on the broad level was hey let's
look around what what ones do you have
wait you have the letter of Paul to the
Colossians we don't have that one we
only have his letter to the Ephesians
and the Philippians and first and 2
Corinthians and Galatians we don't have
that one can we can we copy
that and this is one of the remarkable
things is it was never controlled
centrally it was never defined centrally
this was something the spirit of God did
without central control
that should fill you with
smiles God did something we did not plan
on when he used his people to recognize
his word for the inherent Authority that
it
had you say well where where do we see
all of that come to us we see all of it
come to us you want to see it at the
tail end of the 200
no the tail end of the second century
the tail end of the 100s
there there is a document that we have
dug up in the world called the
muratorian
fragment and you will find differences
here right as we discussed if you take
all the writers from the very earliest
parts of the post-apostolic church and
combine all of their quotations and
Illusions to scripture together you're
able to construct a new testament that
really is only missing 2 Thessalonians
phiman 2 third John and Jude I mean
let's be honest phiman second and third
John are personal letters that are as
short as a personal letter usually is
they're one chapter long they're tiny
their scripture yes but there's reason
why they weren't quoted um probably the
same reason why you've never really had
a sermon series through second and third
John or read them recently same thing
the early church right book of Jude is a
little bit different that one has a
different story of its own that we'll
get into someday uh and then 2
Thessalonians right just for some reason
or another uh the early earliest church
does not quote it it doesn't mean that
it's wrong or bad or anything like that
it just means it just didn't quote it uh
that we have any um uh mention of anyway
but when we come to the muratorian
fragment we have something
different uh the discussions are still
going on uh the multifocality of this
and here's the thing this is not like
the people of God were missing things
they had every scripture that God had
intended for them to have
right even in their error God had
working with them in the midst of their
error it's okay they were able to still
be Christians and they'll still be able
to be saved even though they didn't have
every single copy of Paul's writings
right just like you Christian you have
all of the New and Old Testament you
haven't studied and learned of it you
can still be
saved right by the end of the second
century the muratorian fragments um
illustrates though H and in fact it what
it does is it lists out a Canon list uh
and we actually have this fragment from
the 2 Century which is nutty that we
actually have that thing um and the
original not not a copy of the original
right the acceptance of phiman and
second John and Jude are added to that
whole list but it shows an unfamiliarity
with watch this list third John James
the book of
Hebrews and both of Peter's
letters which is really interesting
because first Peter was never denied
James was known from the earliest days
Hebrews was quoted in the first century
multiple occasions and so was second
Peter so it's really fascinating because
in the muroran fragment we have that uh
a church community in one one part of
the world was not aware of some of these
letters that shouldn't surprise us um
that should encourage us a bit actually
uh because we have evidence that there
was no Central Command making directives
about this right they had all these
discussions throughout history what do
we do with this how do we deal with this
what do we do with that one and notice a
lot of the issues have to do with some
of the shorter books in the uh what's
called the general Epistles James second
third John Jude you know 1 and second
Peter and all
that but even inside the muroran
fragment most people don't even go and
read it if you go and read it uh you'll
also find that it includes not only all
of those from the New Testament but it
also includes the wisdom of Solomon a
book that was written um either right
before or during the the uh the lifetime
of Jesus um and they also accepted
another book in their Community uh not
only did they they had no problem with
the Book of Revelation which is very
unusual um but they accepted The
Apocalypse of Peter now this is a this
is a non-canonical book uh problematic
book has all sorts of issues in it uh
we'll talk about it some night I'm sure
um but they even inside the muratorian
fragment they say look there's several
in our assembly that refuse to use this
and treat it as
scripture but then there's others who
accept it so but we have determined not
to include it in in the gathered
assembly that's
awesome that that's an awesome thing
because it is this this little lens that
we have back into the 2 Century of them
Discerning these things and saying look
unless there is consensus on this we
will not allow it in
worship that's how multifocality works
on a local
level when you extrapolate that out to
the church as a
whole in a day without email and Postal
Service where it takes you weeks to
cross the
Empire you can understand why it took
some time to recognize certain books all
the way
across the
board the church demonstrates a
multifocal process for Discerning
scripture communal agreement practical
considerations and the discernment of an
inherent Authority
as I said before the the identification
of the cannon was a pruning task it's
not a productive one it is not that
they're coming through and trying to
build this they are trying to determine
what doesn't belong in scripture what
doesn't belong in the gathered assembly
what ought not to be read in the
gathered assembly because there was
there was highly thought of books that
that were in scripture as well things
like the Epistle of Barnabas and The
Shepherd of hermis and the diday and
things like this even in some there was
a few little circles that actually
thought that first Clement might be
included into the uh the biblical
text they weren't looking at it as a
productive task they were looking at it
as a pruning task now that doesn't mean
that they weren't willing to add
something that was
Apostolic if if all the other churches
agreed that it was Apostolic and they
come with a witness of that they said
great
beautiful and here's the thing that not
a lot of people really think about
either is that the original letters to
the churches would have been signed the
original autographs would not only have
been signed as we have indications of
even in the New Testament they would
have still been in
existence those letters written to the
church in Corinth would still be there
in the church in
Corinth you have to understand and it's
not like they received these letters in
the New Testament and go oh that's nice
uh let's let's uh make a copy real quick
and throw out the old one no these
things were still around now have they
survived to today no no Papyrus doesn't
last that long unless it is in perfect
conditions and Asia Minor not perfect
conditions in fact most of the Papyrus
that we have is going to be from Egypt
because perfect conditions and even in
perfect conditions we just have bit bits
and pieces page here uh a faximile there
or not a faximile a um um like a bolt of
a book there or a small version of a
codex we we do not have entire Bibles
from you know first and 2 Century it
doesn't work like that we have little
pieces but they
did the actual original copy of the
Gospel of John in the days of polycarp
or in the days of Justin Martyr had they
had access to it would have only been 60
or 70 years
old so it was more of a communication
issue of
clarity and it took
time and the existence of these things
bearing the marks of the Apostles
bearing their
signatures the stuff means that the
early church did not have a difficult
time determining scripture what they had
a difficult time doing was keeping other
stuff out
it was a lot
easier for the church to recognize an
Apostolic letter that was inspired and
sent to a church Community than ones
that were sent to individuals like
phiman and second and third John does
that list sound
familiar it would make sense that
Clement even being all the way in Rome
writing to the church in Corinth is able
to quote from James the Book of James
was sent throughout the world it was a
circular letter to the 12 tribes of the
dispersion and so there's copies of it
everywhere so there was early early
recognition of what it
is right and we know that they were able
to attest to it of their own lifetime
the Gospel of Luke together with acts
Paul quotes his scripture that's
incredible this is one of those great
things about the church is is one of the
great things about Christians and about
the guidance of the holy spirit that we
can't really see but we see these hints
about it the pruning task that took
place here was to ensure that things
that are not scripture don't get
in that's the mechanism that God used to
guide his people to hear his word not a
single one of them had the full
perspective that's one of the nice
things and one of the benefits that we
have of living the era that we do we
have the full
perspective I have the New Testament
sitting here on my desk complete and
bound up all 27 books all in my language
I can see the original languages I can
see the whole manuscript tradition we
have incredible things they had first
century excuse me they had first century
uh copies they actually had the
originals that they could even go see if
you travel to Ephesus I promise you the
book of Ephesians that Paul the
autograph he actually wrote was
there they didn't just destroy it as
they sent it
along the actual Gospel of Matthew was
likely stored in um Antioch you know
these types of things were observable
but it's hard to communicate it's hard
to travel it's it's not like the modern
world you can't just send a Tweet about
it you can't just send an email about it
that this is it takes a long long time
and these things don't survive the ER
the
ages but I just want to point out to us
that the early Church's approach was
never to look to a single Council or
governing a body to impose a
cannon and before anyone thinks that
that's the way of it that that happens
in the 4th Century look the 4th Century
councils that put out Canon
lists um are are reflecting already
agreed upon consensus throughout
Christianity and it had been a consensus
for a long
time sure were there debates over things
like third John and Jude and second
Peter and a little bit to Revelation
yeah yeah that's because there was so
many other things that were written they
wanted to ensure that they were
scripture before they just welcomed them
in because everyone was writing false
stuff in Peter's name everyone was
writing false stuff in Paul's names in
fact the muratorian fragment even even
mentions that he said look we've got
seven letters from Paul that we know are
authentic there's two other ones but we
know for sure they aren't his a letter
to his from the to the leans and a
letter of his to the
alexandrians they say we know those
aren't authentically Paul but we know
the other ones are right they speak with
a Clarity and a familiarity of things
that they were able to check these are
not morons these are not illiterate
Rubes what they are are very devoted
Christian Chans that are working with
partial
lenses and if and I have put this
question out to people who think that
the church's job is to uh canonize
things or to decide upon
scripture first of all that gets
everything backwards second of all why
wait until the 4th
Century the second century could have
used an authoritative Cannon list when
marcian was out doing his nonsense in
the midc century
he was writing false Canon
lists why doesn't the church do it then
you say well it's always in response to
heresy there's a good one the marcian
heresy was one of the largest ones one
of the most popular and it was dealing
specifically in the area of Canon if the
church had the authority to canonize Why
didn't it do so
then the answer is because canonization
is not a work of
man they are simply recognizing
God's words it is God's work here's the
thing if it is the work of
man we espouse the danger of what I call
the single
Source when we talk about a pruning
method of canonization or
recognition we're talking about ensuring
that things that aren't scripture end up
in uh do not end up in
scripture why do we think about it that
way well is pretty basic it is far more
dangerous think with me on this for a
second it is far more dangerous for a
non inspired book to be included in
scripture and treated as the word of
God than to accidentally leave out a
canonical book like
Jude a
falsely considered inspired work can
work far more havoc in the church than
for going to read
phiman or the Book of Revelation I mean
be honest of the 66 books of the Bible
you know that there is a handful of them
that you do not ever read by
choice or study by
choice non-canonical works if they are
included in someone's
Bible very quickly misleading Believers
and the early church knew that risk
that's a really basic risk we do not
want to add to God's word we don't want
to take from it but we certainly don't
want to add to
it we don't want to miss out on the
revelation of God but we certainly don't
want to treat the words of man as if it
is the revelation of God and so we
ensure that we don't do that because
here's the thing to do that is
exceptionally dangerous and it's just as
dangerous to rely on a single Source or
vote to determine the
Canon if any one of you are familiar
with textual criticism or textual
variance you know that how how marvelous
it is that we actually have these
variants because what it does is it
expresses to us how God used fallible
people a crowd of them unplanned
decentralized to preserve an infallible
word it's provable that's remarkable he
does the same thing with Canon
recognition not a single sord or a vote
nobody's doing this at the Council of
NAA that is a that is a a myth that I
hope just dies someday no such thing is
taking place at NAA why because they
already knew the scripture if you read
the early church writers you can
actually see them quoting scripture all
over the
place it does not come through a single
source that would be dangerous and by
the way also inconsistent with how God
preserved his word god preserved his
word through multifocality God God had
leadership in his church that was
multifocal you didn't just have one
Apostle you didn't just have one Bishop
you had multiple Apostles you had
multiple Elders
always and so when it comes to
preservation you had multiple uh uh
copers throughout Christianity but you
also had multiple Canon recognitions
throughout Christianity that's a
gift it's a gift because wisdom is found
amongst all the people of God not just
in one
group relying on a single Source or vote
to determine the cannon would have been
dangerous and inconsistent with how God
preserved his
word it is a shared
recognition not a singular
Authority I want you to compare that if
you're familiar with the textual
tradition of the Quran there's one of
the most tightly guarded texts in
history
there
are very very very very few textual
variants and only those are ones that
slipped
through by comparison it's not even
close textual variants uh were wiped
out because there was all sorts of
different conflicting reports about the
life of muhammmad and his words and how
he laid out the Quran and and multiple
things uh it wasn't until a generation
after him that they gathered together
all the ver versions of it destroyed
everything else and just put out a
singular agreed upon centralized
centrally controlled
Quran while it's
effective if that was
scripture we would have to trust the
later people to be as infallible and
inspired as the
author Muslims have to trusts that
uthman got it right we do not have any
such
problem no in fact the Holy
Spirit
preserved and
recognized the New Testament through
normal people making
mistakes I think that's one of the
awesomest things about how the spirit of
God works that he uses normal people
fallible people who make
mistakes to preserve and to recognize
his infallible
word it is consistent with how God
functions and that means that as one of
our final points here the preservation
and the recognition of the New Testament
works the New Testament uh Canon are
works of God
I have said before that if you think
inspiration is remarkable you should see
preservation both of the work of the
Holy Spirit not only that preservation
is the work of the holy spirit so is the
recognition of his
writings the church does not make the
scriptures God makes his scriptures and
he forms his church through those
scriptures think about it is is this not
consistent with the old testament which
came first the the temple or the
instructions for building the
Temple the New Testament deals with the
building of the church as the Temple of
the holy spirit in the long form
comparison it's plain as day now you say
well maybe that doesn't really function
for the time of the book of Acts yes
this is why they had apostles then
because there wasn't a new testament yet
and so there was an authority specific
to the apostles there was God actually
working in various ways speaking in
tongues New Testament prophets you can't
deal with the first generation of the
church as
Norm I say that in in love to my
Pentecostal brothers and sisters you
cannot work with the first generation of
the church as the norm you have to look
more towards the third and fourth
generation of the church after the
apostles are gone to see how is it that
God will work through us without
Apostles without prophets without some
of these charismatic gifts where is it
that God will actually guide us where
are his miracles being done and it is
through his word and it is through his
people and it is a remarkable
thing it is through God's multifocal
preservation and the communal
discernment of inspired texts that we
have the New Testament scriptures today
this approach ensured that the
scriptures weren't dictated by Central
Authority they were never voted upon
people don't just get together and do
this uh that never happens uh that
doesn't happen until the end of the 4th
century and everybody is very clear in
fact we have entire Bibles that are uh
written before that those uh meetings
ever take place um the the entire
approach assured that the scriptures
were not dictated by any Cal Authority
they weren't controlled they were not
preserved they were not recognized by
any Central
Authority it's just normal
Christians recognizing God's word for
the inherent Authority it had this is
how the spirit of God carried along Us
in recognizing
it it reflects God's
wisdom it is not human
imposition the early church councils did
not determine the Canon they merely
affirmed what was already in widespread
use and respected as inspired scripture
it is a community under under the
authority of scripture not the other way
around Justin Martyr even defines that
when they come together uh this is in
the midc century when they come together
they read the Memoirs of the Apostles
and the writings of the prophets this is
the old New Testament they recognized
all of this the scriptures are to be
read received and proclaimed not as
institutionalized documents but as the
Living Word of God that unites and forms
the
church this whole
approach gives
us an appreciation it gives me an
appreciation for the unbelievable value
that the New Testament is to the Church
of
Christ we are able from our vantage
point to be able to look with longtime
perspective and see how God did this
they didn't get to see that side of it
we we get to have the entire New
Testament they were working with part of
it and what an incredible faithfulness
they had working with part of it that
that's humbling and that's
encouraging and we should feel nothing
but solidity in what we
hold because God has led his people and
his people have recognized his word what
an incredible thing go read it will you
Lord's blessings to you all
[Music]
[Applause]